Do you hate getting your feet wet in winter? Do you hate slipping and falling on the frozen pavement? Do you wish there was a winter shoe that would last you more than one or two winters? Well then you’d be happy to know that you’re not the only ones with these peeves, and that this new winter boot has been designed especially for you!

It’s cold. It’s wet. It’s been raining for days. There are puddles everywhere. You hop over most of them but the sun came out for a second and made you miss one. You stepped right into it. You can feel the chill, that disgusting sogging up of your sock. And if that wasn’t enough, you also slipped and fell on your ass a few moments later while trying to shake out the water.

We’ve all had these days. In a split second your entire day is just ruined. All because of a bit of water. The only full proof solution is those cartoonishly colorful all-plastic boots that make you feel like an action figure or a Barbie doll when wearing them.

Well… it was the only solution…

What Are We Talking About?

They call them the BooJoy Winter Shoes. A brand new design coming to us from a startup by the people who know how hard winter can really be: The Swedes.

The BooJoy Winter Shoes seeks to address everything: Water proofing, slip resisting, warmth, durability, comfort and style, and it does so with the most advanced materials, designs and techniques known to man.

Did they succeed in creating this “wonder boot”? A boot that will see you safely through this winter, and the next one, and the next ten after that? Spoilers, yes, yes they did. But we got these to make sure and would love to tell you about our experience.

What Makes These Winter Shoes So Special?

What picture do you have in your mind when you think “winter shoes”? You’re thinking of something thick, bulky, heavy and ugly. And also they don’t really work if the water gets anywhere above the massive sole these boots usually have.

The BooJoy Winter Shoes looked at that and thought, no, that’s a really dumb idea. I don’t want bricks on my legs in winter. I just want to stay dry and warm. And that’s precisely what they did.

The BooJoy Winter Shoes are made of an outer layer that is fully water-repellent, and without any laces or the like, so there are no nooks and crannies for water to sneak inside. The inside is fuzzy and cozy to keep you warm but by some wizardry also breathes enough so you don’t sweat like crazy. The sole, oh boy that anti-shock, anti-slip sole, it’s the icing on the cake. We could talk about it for hours before mentioning what the shoe even looks like.

So to stop rambling, we compiled an easy to follow list of why the BooJoy Winter Shoes are absolutely the best winter shoes out there:

✅ Fully water proof – no more puddle water getting in through the cracks

✅ Warm and cozy interior that keeps away the cold without making you sweaty

✅ Lightweight. No more walking around in bricks.

✅ Anti-slip sole – puddles, flooded stairs, iced up pavement, nothing to worry about

✅ Shock Resistant – the sole is also shock resistant, which means your feet won’t get tired like they would from the massive winter boots you used to wear.

✅ Durable materials – these boots might just be the last ones you’ll ever need to buy

✅ Fashionable, unisex design that goes well with any outfit, look perfectly casual

We always doubt claims of “the most comfortable” or “the best” of anything, but we can see why people are shouting these boots praises from the rooftops. Comfortable, functional, warm, fashionable, there’s nothing else you need from a shoe other than for it to make your toast or something.

 
How Much do the BooJoy Winter Shoes Cost?
But now we get to the best part. The best part, you say, what can be better than the best winter shoes ever made? Well, the price. Normally the BooJoy Winter Shoes will cost you a mere 159.9 €, which is more than fair for the quality you get and still much less than some big brand that’ll get covered in mud anyway. But the global launch of the BooJoy Winter Shoes comes with an absolutely massive sale, giving them away at 50% off and free international shipping! You can now get a pair of BooJoy Shoes for just 79 €.

This winter is going to be nice and warm. The BooJoy Winter Shoes are here to make sure of that. And for a price anyone can afford. We can’t not recommend these wonderful boots. Go get them while they’re still on sale!
