(CNN) — It was Valentine's Day 1996 when Lee Green walked into a mountain lodge in Nepal, surrounded by the snowcapped Himalayas, and encountered Mandy Halse for the first time.
Green and Halse were thousands of miles from their respective homes in England and New Zealand. Both were backpackers in their twenties determined to see as much of the world as they could. They'd found themselves in Nepal by a series of coincidences.
When Green entered the Nepalese teahouse, the stage was set for a memorable meet-cute.
Except on February 14, there were no sparks between the two travelers.
Two weeks later it was a different story, one that's still ongoing 26 years later.
For Halse, Nepal was a spontaneous layover en route from Auckland to the UK, where she was set to visit an old friend. She'd been exploring Thailand and Malaysia, and a travel agent had recommended breaking up the journey with a stint in Nepal.
After learning of Nepal's trekking routes, she met a British woman, Kirsty, while in line for a permit to hike the Annapurna Circuit. The two decided to join forces to tackle the trail, which winds through Nepal's central mountains, taking in picturesque villages and incredible views along the way.
Halse, who'd had no idea what to expect, was awestruck by the spectacular landscape, particularly when she and fellow hikers arrived in the village of Ghorepani, where they set up camp in a "teahouse" mountain lodge.
"It was the most beautiful setting," Halse tells CNN Travel today.
She was sitting in the lodge's common area with her new friend Kirsty and other backpackers when Lee Green walked in.
Green, a mailman from the English town of Coventry, was traveling Nepal on a career break with colleague and good friend Murray. The two men had originally intended to use their sabbatical to embark on a cycle ride from the UK to India, but had abandoned the plan after just 200 miles, realizing navigating northern Europe in winter on bike was going to take too long.
Instead, they'd ended up flying to India, trekking through the northern part of the country, before making their way to Nepal.
The two friends arrived at the city of Pokhara, and set off on the Annapurna trek. Like Halse, they'd befriended other travelers en route.
"There's one path that links village to village to village, so most people that go trekking tend to overlap each other, meet up with each other at the tea houses, along the path," Green tells CNN Travel today.
When Green's group entered the teahouse, they were warmly greeted by Halse and the other travelers. The backpackers ended up chatting through the night, playing cards by candlelight.
"It was really nice, it was really chilled," says Halse. "The teahouse was gorgeous."
The travelers spent a couple of days there, before continuing as a group onto the next leg of the trek.
Halse and Green were friendly to one another on their first few days hiking, but they didn't have much opportunity to chat one on one.
"We didn't talk much in the beginning as we were both very quiet, and we walked in different parts of the group: me in the middle with Murray, and Lee at the back with Kirsty," says Halse.
