(CNN) — Budapest's craft cocktail movement has seen new bars and clubs spread across town like wildfire in recent years, making it that much harder to choose the best of the bunch.
While the Hungarian capital's ruin bars offer a unique experience, the luxury bar scene here is second to none.
Whether you're looking to sample handcrafted cocktails or the finest Tokaji wines, there are a multitude of glamorous bars to choose from, complete with sharply dressed staff and/or top-notch mixologists.
From the High Note Skybar to Blue Fox The Bar at Kempinski, here's a run down of the finest luxury bars in Budapest.
Set at the Four Seasons Gresham Palace, KOLLÁZS -- Brasserie & Bar offers what's arguably the grandest setting in the entire city.
Serving everything from Tokaji wines to bespoke cocktails, its stand out drinks include the Smokey Forest and the Invisible Hungarian, a crystal clear Negroni White crafted with Hungarian Gin and a touch of bergamot, for citrusy complexity.
There's also a delicious à la carte menu prepared by chef Árpád Győrffy, one of the finalists at the prestigious Bocuse d'Or Hungary competition.
Positioned in the heart of the Jewish Quarter, this art deco style bar has gone from strength to strength since it opened in 2017.
Creative manager András Ódor's menu reflects true Hungarian culture and gastronomy, serving up a whole host of bespoke cocktails and bar foods.
The Echo cocktail-- a delicious mix of Rosolio di Bergamotto, Tio Pepe sherry, coconut water, lime juice and a cucumber salt solution, is one of its highlights.
Boutiq'Bar is one of the best spots to sip on bespoke cocktails in a plush, old school setting.
It was co-founded by former Soho House supremo Zoltán Nagy and a strong London vibe is evident throughout.
All the classics are available, as well as an array of specially mixed drinks and expensive bottles of cognac.
We recommend the Space Zombie -- a powerful mix of Bulleit Bourbon whiskey, spice and grapefruit juice.
Located smack bang in the middle of the popular fifth district, the Kempinski Hotel's Blue Fox The Bar has some of the city's more unique cocktails.
The Elysium bar menu lists some real treats, from the delicious Oblivion and Liquid Soul, to the bizarre and bold Taste of Electricity.
A night lounge complete with a music sommelier and live bands takes center stage on Fridays and Saturdays.
You can also order a bite to eat from the hotel's very own branch of Nobu and have it brought to your table.
St. Andrea Wine & Skybar delivers an all round view of the spectacular Budapest skyline.
Positioned atop Vörösmarty Square, it has outdoor terraces for the summer months and an indoor bar for colder nights.
The bar's highly-trained staff whip an array of signature cocktails, including the Black Sheep -- a citrusy mix of whiskey and amaro liqueur.
Visitors also have the option to tuck into some great gourmet bar snacks, which can be rustled up in no time at all.
Just a stone's throw from the Hungarian Parliament Building, Easy Wine offers a unique wine tasting experience in a plush and lively bar atmosphere.
The bar has special self-service machines that allow guests to sample the wines before selecting a glass.
You can even take home a bottle of your favorite tipple at the end of the evening -- the Cruxx Gemina Sour Cherry Wine is well worth a sample.
Easy Wine also has one of the city's finest chefs on hand to serve up a decadent à la carte menu complete with delicious desserts.

