CNN had a rough year in 2021 that was filled with embarrassing scandals, ratings woes and uncertainty over the struggling network’s future.

While CNN has long been plagued with liberal bias and is often accused of appearing to present news with an agenda, the network’s 2021 mishaps and gaffes go far beyond those of a typical mainstream news organization. 


CNN has faced embarrassment on multiple occasions over the past few years, from offering disgraced attorney Michael Avenatti regular airtime to its Trump-era pivot away from founder Ted Turner’s just-the-facts approach to news, as the network constantly generates publicity for the wrong reasons. However, the network’s 2021 saw even redder faces as humiliation popped up at every turn. 

CNN legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin returned to the airwaves in June for the first time since his embarrassing 2020 Zoom masturbation incident, thanking the liberal network for not firing him and saying he felt The New Yorker's termination of him was excessive.

Toobin, who was swiftly fired from The New Yorker last year for his conduct, listened as daytime anchor Alisyn Camerota had the painfully awkward "honors" of describing what happened and its consequences. Toobin was witnessed by colleagues exposing himself and masturbating on a staff Zoom call, leading to widespread ridicule of the veteran journalist.

His return resulted in one of the most bizarre moments in recent cable news history as Camerota asked what he was thinking. 

"Well, obviously, I wasn't thinking very well or very much, and it was something that was inexplicable to me. I think one point – I wouldn't exactly say in my defense, because nothing is really in my defense. I didn't think I was on the call. I didn't think other people could see me," Toobin said. "I thought that I had turned off the Zoom call. Now, that's not a defense. This was deeply moronic and indefensible." 

CNN’s biggest star first began causing headaches for the liberal network in 2020 when he conducted a series of widely criticized, chummy interviews with his brother, then-New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo. The siblings would chide each other's looks and bicker over their affection for their mother, but the CNN anchor also gave the governor a platform to tout his leadership amid the pandemic.

Cuomo was previously barred from covering the New York governor, a rule that was apparently lifted by the network at the beginning of the pandemic and later re-implemented as the Democrat became engulfed in a tsunami of political scandals. There were critics who called out the conflict of interest at the time, but the playful banter between the Cuomo brothers was widely embraced by fans of the governor, many of them members of the media as news organizations praised the Democrat's response to the pandemic and obsessed over his daily press briefings. 

When the calendar turned to 2021, things got worse for the Cuomo siblings when the governor was accused of sexual misconduct by an assortment of women and his baby brother put journalism ethics aside to offer a hand. 

The New York attorney general's investigation that led to the governor stepping down also revealed that CNN’s most-popular host was using his media industry connections to help his brother fight off accusations, all while hiding the truth from both viewers and CNN management. 

CNN fired Cuomo as a result and reportedly learned about a sexual misconduct allegation against the anchor himself that was unrelated to the governor’s situation during the probe. It was a separate accusation from that of veteran TV producer Shelley Ross, who penned a New York Times essay in September about an incident where he squeezed her buttock without permission in 2005. At the time, they were ABC News colleagues. 

As the calendar turns to 2022, Cuomo – who finished 2021 as CNN’s most-watched host – is no longer employed by the network.

Ironically, CNN’s in-house media pundit Brian Stelter famously declared Cuomo has "boundaries" during an appearance on CBS’ "The Late Show with Stephen Colbert" before the anchor was terminated. 

One CNN insider told Fox News Digital there was universal relief within the network over his dismissal. The breakup has been acrimonious, with Cuomo reportedly planning to go to court to recoup the rest of the money from his contract.
