Russia's Vladimir Putin has repeatedly denied planning to attack Ukraine, but the US believes he has decided to invade and is on the brink of doing so.

An estimated 150,000 Russian troops are positioned close to Ukraine's borders. What happens next could jeopardise Europe's entire security structure.

How serious is the threat of invasion?
For months the US said it did not think a final decision had been made, but on 18 February President Joe Biden said he believed Mr Putin had decided to attack "in the coming days". In the words of the Czech prime minister, "Europe is a step away from war".

Russia is adamant it has no plans to attack Ukraine, a country of 44 million people. But it has before, in 2014, when it seized Crimea and backed a conflict in Ukraine's eastern Donbas region.

How big is Russia's military build-up?
Nato says everything points to a "full-fledged attack". According to the US, Russia has moved more than 150,000 troops close to Ukraine's borders, both in Russia and in Belarus, and 40,000 more if you include Russian-backed separatists and Crimea.

One US defence official said "40 to 50% are in an attack position" but Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky insists there is no need to panic.

Russia says it has withdrawn some units as they end military exercises but Russian troops who took part in drills in Belarus are not yet going home. Nato sees no sign of Russian de-escalation.

President Putin insists Russia does not want war and is ready to negotiate, agreeing with France to intensify diplomatic efforts.

But if his demands for "security guarantees" are not met, he has threatened "appropriate retaliatory military-technical measures".

Russia has also ramped up its rhetoric and there have been several incidents that the West believes could be used as a pretext for attack.

Why is Russia threatening Ukraine?
Russia has long resisted Ukraine's move towards European institutions, both Nato and the EU. Its core demand now is for the West to guarantee Ukraine will not join Nato, a defensive alliance of 30 countries.

Ukraine shares borders with both the EU and Russia. As a former Soviet republic it has deep social and cultural ties with Russia, and Russian is widely spoken there, but ever since Russia invaded in 2014 those relations have frayed.

When Ukrainians deposed their pro-Russian president in early 2014, Russia annexed Ukraine's southern Crimean peninsula and backed separatists who captured large swathes of eastern Ukraine. The rebels have fought the Ukrainian military ever since in a conflict that has claimed more than 14,000 lives.

Russia has complained that a 2015 Minsk peace deal for eastern Ukraine is far from being fulfilled. But it also accused of being part of the lingering conflict.

How might Russia attack?
Much of the attention is on eastern Ukraine where there has been a surge in ceasefire violations across the front line, with the deaths of two Ukrainian soldiers.

But President Biden has warned: "We believe they will target Ukraine's capital Kyiv, a city of 2.8 million innocent people."

Moscow has insisted "there is no Russian invasion", but if there is, Russia can mobilise troops in Crimea, Belarus and around Ukraine's eastern borders.


